[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to have a look at two very beautiful and important
results du to FMA and Oiler which help us greatly
when we're working with this modular arithmetic
these are very uh insightful and actually fun
kind of results and to motivate this let's just uh
first set the scene again so we are talking about
modular arithmetic and I remind you that n mod m
equals r that means that R is the remainder when n
is divided by m and we said that K is congruent to
L mod M precisely when K mod m equals L mod m in
other words when K and L have the same remainders
mod M and then we had this theorem that I stated
which was that if two numbers K1 and L1 are
congruent mod m in other words have this property
and K2 and L2 are also congruent mod M then the
product of K1 and K2 is congruent to the product
of L1 and L2 so arithmetic mod M works very much
like ordinary arithmetic so as an application of
this Pleasant result suppose that we know that 8^
the 10 is congruent to 12 Mod 13 that's actually a
true fact all right and suppose we were interested
in finding out what 8 to the 11 was congruent to
Mod 13 it's really asking what the remainder is
when you divide 8 to the 11 by 13 so one thing
we could do is we could take 8 to the 10 well we
could compute 8 to the 11 essentially and divide
by 13 but the point is that if we already know
what this thing is congruent to then all we really
have to do is use this theorem and multiply both
sides by eight right eight is congruent eight so
if we multiply both sides by 8 then we get 8 to
the 11 is congruent to 8 * 12 now 8 * 12 is 96 and
that's 5 more than 91 which is a multiple of 13 so
8 * 12 is congruent to 5 Mod 13 and this allows to
calculate the remainder of some biggish power of a
number without actually having to go through the
trouble of actually Computing the number itself
so let's have a look at these powers of eight for
example Mod 13 okay so 8 to the 0 is 1 8 to the
1 is 8 82 is 64 but modulo 13 64 is the same as
12 because we can subtract 4 * is 52 now I just
note that 12 is really the same as minus1 these
two numbers differ by 13 so sometimes it's more
convenient to think of 12 as being minus1 okay now
to get 8 Cub we would multiply the previous one
by 8 now we could multiply the 12 by 8 or in fact
the 64 but it's nicest to multiply the minus1 by 8
to get minus 8 and that's congruent to five just
add 13 then 8 to the 4 we multiply the previous
one by 8 that gives us 40 and 40 is congruent to
one because we can subtract 39 so in this game
any multiple of 13 counts as essentially zero we
can add or subtracted without affecting anything
multiplying by 8 we get 8 to 5th is congruent to
8 and then the pattern continues because we're at
the same stage as we were there then 8 to 6 is
congruent to minus1 8 7 is congruent to 5 8 to
the 8 is congruent to 1 and it repeats again 8 to
the 9 is 8 and then minus one and then 5 and then
1 so we see that we have a repetition here going
on with period four and we can summarize that
in this little formula here that says that 8 to
the n + 4 is congruent to 8 to the N so when you
add four to the exponent you haven't changed the
residue or the modulus or the remainder Mod 13 and
on the right hand side here I've just listed some
of the multiples of 13 which is sort of convenient
if you're doing this kind of modular arithmetic
say Mod 13 so this is very important fact that if
we look at a fixed modulus and a fixed number
just powers of that number that we end up in
some kind of cyclic Loop there's a periodicity
happening there and that's sort of the key to
this uh this modular arithmetic story here so that
was interesting but since we are mathematicians we
want to understand what's going on want to zoom
out a little bit and see what the bigger picture
is so to try to get a sense of that here is a
table of powers of not just eight here are the
powers of eight that we basically just had a look
at in the previous slide but powers of all the
other numbers modulo 13 as well so we're doing
arithmetic here Mod 13 this is a table of n to
the K where n is one of the numbers from 1 to 12
and K is a power well starting with essentially
one and then 2 three all the way up to say 12
okay it's very instructive now to make such a
table and we can do it relatively simply because
we don't actually have to take these big Powers
we just have to multiply every previous one by
whatever we're considering so for example at any
one of these rows if we want to say look at the
powers of four 4^ SAR is 16 which is congruent to
three and then to get the next power we multiply
this previous one by four giving us 12 multiply
this one by four gives us 48 which is 39 + 9 so
it's congruent to 9 and so on so what do we see
well there's some very nice patterns here but
it's also not entir L obvious what the overall
story is let's observe that very important issue
is that when we get to the 12 column that all of
the numbers are one that's the most important
fact about this story there's one scattered
elsewhere and depending on the number or the row
that you choose the ones are appearing at some
regular intervals so here they're appearing
every three times there's a periodicity of
three while over here say the periodicity is
every six and um over here it's periodicity 4
and over here well there's no periodicity
it goes all the way up to 12 and then it
repeats so if you haven't seen this kind of
thing before it's well worth uh having a very
close look at this it's natural to look at
something like this and say this is great
this is a a source of fun and investigation
and I can do the same kind of thing looking
at say pow is not Mod 13 but mod some other
number and then compare do the same kinds of
things happen so what you'd really like to be
able to do if you really understood this is be
able to substitute any number for the 13 and
sort of beforehand be able to predict largely
what's going to happen with this table right
that means that you really understand what's
going on but drawing up the table doing that leg
work first is a kind of necessary preliminary to
understanding the pattern now originally I gave
you the exercise of trying to figure out what
happens with zed when you divide it by 13 and
Zed has lots of powers of 10 so it makes sense
for us to look at what happens with powers of 10
mod 13 and if you look at the previous table you
see that the powers of 10 repeat every six so 10
the 6 is congruent to one and then afterwards it
repeats and the various powers are 10 s is 9 and
then 12 and then 3 and then four and then when we
get to six we get to one and after that it repeats
namely uh 10 9 12 3 4 1 10 9 12 3 4 1 and so on so
that means that if we want to understand 10 into
the N Mod 13 we really need to understand n mod
6 there's now a sixfold symmetry that's appearing
here in the fact that these remainders repeat
every six so if we have a very big Power there
we really want to know where does it sit in this
pattern of multiples of six that will determine
which of these various remainders we actually end
up on so let me illustrate that with this example
suppose we have 10 to the 398 Mod 13 we want to
figure out what that is in other words we want to
figure out what the remainder is when we divide 10
398 by 13 okay so let's note that 398 is 66 * 6
+ 2 in other words if I divide it by six I get a
quotient of 66 and a remainder of two all right so
in modular arithmetic language that's saying that
398 is congruent to 2 mod 6 the remainder that you
get when you divide it by six is two we're talking
about this exponent up here knowing that we can
now do the following computation Mod 13 okay we
now can say that 10^ 398 is equal to 10 to the 6
* 66 + 2 and now I'm going to rewrite this just
using ordinary rules for exponents this 10 6 * 66
I'll write it as 10 6 to the 66 and this plus two
gets represented by multiplying by 10 squared all
right so just usual laws of exponents for ordinary
numbers tells us those two are equal but now since
we're working Mod 13 okay the 10^ the 6 we've seen
is congruent to one so we're allowed to replace
this thing inside the brackets with a single
one that's great because then this thing to the 66
power will be congruent to 1 to the 66 and that is
very simple to calculate 1 to the 66 is just 1 10
2ar is congruent to 9 so this whole thing becomes
just 1 66 * 9 or 9 so this number Mod 13 is 9
it gives a remainder of nine when you divide it
by 13 and we've analyzed that by looking at the
exponent and basically analyzed it modulo 6 so
it's very interesting that this original problem
that has to do with divisibility mod 7 ends up
converting these partially to a question about
divisibility of the exponent mod 6 okay that's
great but we still have quite a ways to go if we
want to get to zed how do we deal with a tower of
exponents well let's look at a simpler example
let's look at 10 to the 10 10 mod 13 see if we
can get our heads around that so we know that
working mod 6 powers of 10 follow this pattern
so 10^ the 1 is congruent to 4 mod 6 10^ sared is
congruent to well if we multiply this by 10 we get
40 and now mod 6 40 is the same as four because
we can Cast Away 36 which is 6 * 6 so 10 the 1 is
congruent to 4 and 10^ 2ar is also congruent to
4 mod 6 but then 10 cubed will also be congruent
to 40 which is 4 mod 6 so then the pattern will
just keep on repeating that all these powers of
10 10 to the N will all be congruent to four mod
6 if the power is at least one won't be true for
n equal 0 but but if we start with one then it
will be true for any power that we get to from
there so 10^ the 10 is congruent to four mod 6 and
so now if we switch to Mod 13 here now is the Mod
13 calculation the original 10 to the 10 to the 10
we've just decided that this 10 to the 10 here is
Con to 4 mod 6 so that this whole thing here this
10 10 can be replaced with 6 L + 4 that's what
this is saying that it's a multiple of 6 + 4 and I
don't really care what that L is as we'll see very
shortly it's just some multiple of 6 + 4 it's the
plus4 that's critical and why that is is because
when we write this now using our exponential
laws or rules this 10 6 L becomes 10 to the 6
to the L and the plus 4 means we multiply by 10
4 and then we get that same trick that happened
last time the whole point was that we knew that
10 the 6 was congruent to one that was the Big
simplification 10 the 6 is congruent to one and
so that means we can replace this thing with a one
that means that whole thing here simplifies
just to one to the L which is just one 10 4
fourth is congruent to 3 Mod 13 and so we end up
getting just the whole thing is congruent to 3 Mod
13 we can appreciate that we haven't gotten
anywhere near actually dividing this huge
number by 13 that might be a major pain to
do okay but in order to get at its remainder
we can use this indirect reasoning having to
do with this observation that the remainders
are cyclical in fact they're cyclical with a
period six so once we get our head around to
sort of how many uh periods of six there are and
what the remainder is mod six then we can unravel
the remainder with this very pleasant uh kind of
arithmetic in the modular world all right so now
let's finally address this challenge that I've
given you to figure out what is the remainder
when you divide Zed by 13 so in other words we
want to calculate what happens to zed Mod 13 and
let's know that this 10 triangle 10 here which
is this Tower of 10 10 as exponents is really
10 to the exponent 10 triangle 9 so it's 10 to
the exponent what's sitting on top of the 10 as
an exponent is 10 triangle 9 okay now we've
seen that to figure out what some power of
10 is congruent to Mod 13 we should look at
the exponent and try to figure out what its
remainder is mod 6 so let's do that let's take
this exponent 10 triangle 9 and look at it mod
6 well actually that's in this case very easy 10
triangle 9 is congruent to four mod 6 why is that
well that's because it's a power of 10 we've
seen that all the powers of 10 10 the 1 10^
2ar 10 cubed 10 4 all of them are congruent to 4
mod 6 because the first one is congruent to four
mod 6 and then the next one will be 10 times that
which is 40 which is also congruent to four mod 6
so 10 triangle 9 will also be congruent to 4
mod 6 just because the pattern is completely
uniform now that means that we can think
about Zed which is 10 to the 10 triangle
9 + 23 as 10 to the 6 k + 4 this number 10
triangle 9 is congruent to 4 6 that means
it can be expressed as 6 * some number k + 4
and we don't know what that K is it's going
to be some humongous number but we don't need to
concern ourselves with it it's the plus4 that's
important all right now we do the same thing
that we did with the other examples we look
at this 10 the 6 k + 4 and we rewrite it as 10
6 to the K time 10 the 4 we still have a plus
23 out here and pleasantly 10 the 6 we've seen is
congruent to 1 Mod 13 so this big term here this
whole thing here becomes just 1 to the K huge
simplification 10^ 4 is congruent to three so
we end up getting 1 * 3 + 23 Mod 13 and that's
3 + 23 which is 26 and 26 happens to be 2 * 13
so that's actually congruent to Zer Mod 13 it
means that the remainder when you divide Zed
by 13 is zero so Zed is actually divisible not
just by the prime three but also by the prime
13 so we found out that even though this number
is so huge there's no way we could write it out
in Hindu Arabic form there is big problems
in actually trying to explicitly divide it
by 13 nevertheless we can use this indirect
argument this computation which is really
done in in the language just of modulo 13
we can deduce that uh this big Z is actually
divisible by 13 so very interesting and this
uh all goes back to my uh series famous math
problems so famous math problems Series
this is actually the first video in that
series deals exactly with the factorization
of this Zed and quite a few people had some
investigations uh on that and in particular one
viewer relike 868 made a very nice calculation
and in fact went through the other primes
less than 100 and figured out that just
by computing that in fact these are the only
two primes that are less than 100 which divide
z um if you like to see that computation he's
actually written it up so if you go to famous
math problems one you can find the link but also
I will put a link in the uh description of the
of this video all right so good stuff so we can
at least in PR principle get at these humongous
congruences using this kind of trickery and this
real understanding of what happens to Powers but
we want to understand that a little bit more
carefully so what actually is the rule that
we're using the general rule that we can extract
from this kind of thinking that goes back to Great
French mathematician of the 17th century Pier
FMA so before we get to Fat's lovely theorem let
me point out that there's lots of applications
of modular arithmetic that are actually quite
connected to daily life they're not all so exotic
as trying to figure out what the remainder of Zen
is when you divided by 13 so for example there's
questions like the following if today is Tuesday
what day will it be say in certain number of
days say in a thousand days thousand days from
now what day of the week is it well this is sort
of obviously a congruence kind of problem because
days of the week correspond to modulo 7 arithmetic
because the days of the week repeat every seven so
what we're really interested in is calculating
what a th is mod 7 all right so let's make that
calculation so what's the remainder that you get
when you divide a th000 by 7 so let's do it in
a little bit of a different way than previously
so instead of actually dividing 1,000 by 7 let's
think about throwing away multiples of seven so
an obvious multiple to throw away is 700 700 is
the same as zero when we're working mod 7 so if we
throw away 700 it really hasn't changed anything
but then the th becomes 300 that's simpler so
we employ the same strategy look for a nice
multiple of seven that we can toss away we can
write 300 as say at 280 + 20 recognizing that
280 is going to be a multiple of seven and so the
280 disappears and we just get congruent to 20 and
then we just throw away 14 and we get six so we
see that a th000 is congruent to six mod 7 so a
th000 days from Tuesday is as far as days of the
week concerned the same as six days from Tuesday
and 6 days from Tuesday is Monday so if today
is Tuesday then in 1 th days it will be Monday
okay so uh there's a very pleasant famous kind of
problem of trying to figure out you know what day
of the week it is at some given day in history
or maybe in the future January 19th uh 1300 four
what day of the week was that well that rests
exactly on this modular kind of arithmetic so
for example uh relevant to that question is what
day will it be in one non-leap year so one year
has 365 days so if we go exactly one year from
today how many weeks have gone by well it's a
question of dividing 365 by 7 and see what the
remainder is or another way of thinking about
it just throwing out multiples of seven so 350 +
15 that's another way of writing this the 350 is
a multiple of seven so we can toss it aside
and we see that 365 is congruent to 15 which
is congruent to one mod 7 and that's telling us
that in one year the day of the week advances by
exactly one so if today is you know January
1st then next year on January 1st it will be
one more day in the week than it is today so
if today is say Tuesday then the next January
1st will be Wednesday and the next January 1st
will be Thursday and so on but of course we have
to remember leap years right in a leap year there
is one extra day so if we're talking about a leap
year then we have to incorporate that and then
the the day shifts not just by one but by two
so you can kind of see that this kind of question
of figuring out what day it was uh you know back
at some historical time or in the year 2079 July
15th what day of the week is that going to be well
a little bit of modular arithmetic taking into
consideration that every year advances youu one
and every ye every Leap Year advances U2 then it's
not so hard to to work such questions out so here
is Pier Fat's lovely observation theorem it's a
direct generalization of the fact that we saw that
Mod 13 the 12th power of all the numbers at least
all the nonzero numbers were all congruent to one
Mod 13 it's a very direct generalization of that
observation so statement is that if p is a prime
that's the crucial thing p is a prime number and
P does not divide n so we have some other number n
which is not divisible by P then n to the p minus1
is congruent to 1 mod P if you take that n to the
P minus first power for example if p is 13 then
we're talking about the 12th power then when you
raise it to the 12th power you're going to get one
Mod 13 so in general n the P minus 1 is congruent
to 1 mod P so this is the one that we've already
seen that Mod 13 n to the 12th will be congruent
to one Mod 13 as long as n is not actually
divisible by 13 or congruent to zero and say Mod
Five a simpler modulus if n's not congruent to Z
mod 5 then n the 4th will be congruent to 1 mod 5
and we can say a simple table of powers here this
is a table of n to the K mod 5 powers of 1 powers
of two powers of three powers of four for example
3 * 3 is 9 which is the same as four then multiply
by 3 again 3 * 4 is 12 which is same as 2 mod 5
and 2 * 3 is 6 which is the same as 1 mod 5 so in
each of these nonzero cases so 1 2 3 or four Once
you raise the number to the fourth power you get
ones now if this was a course in number Theory I
would want to uh and would be obliged to give you
a proof of format's theorem but that's probably
best done after we've done some group Theory a
little bit of group Theory makes that a lot easier
to understand and we probably will do a bit of
group Theory at some point and then we we may have
occasion to talk a little bit about Fat's theorem
and its proof but I want to ask a very natural
sort of extension question what happens if we
consider the same story but the modulus is not a
prime number FAS theorem tells us what happens if
our modulus is a prime number P but what happens
more generally well the great Swiss mathematician
Leonard Oiler figured that out and the statement
is a little bit more complicated than fiz theem
involves an auxiliary function called Oilers
fi function sometimes also called a totient
function so let's talk about the FI function of
Oiler okay so m is a natural number five of M is
what well it's the number of numbers less than M
which are relatively prime to m so it's the size
of a set the set of K where K is a natural number
here everything is a natural number unless I say
otherwise set of K such that K is between 1 and
M including one possibly but less than M and such
that K and M are relatively prime and that means
that they have no common factor no common factor
at all between K and M so we look at that set
the set of all such numbers less than M which
are relatively prime to it and we take the size
of that set how many such numbers there are and
that's 5m so for example 5 of2 there's only one
number which is less than two which is relatively
prime to it namely 1 53 is the size of the set
1 two so it's two 54 the size of the set 1 three
these are the numbers less than four which are
Rel L Prime to it the numbers less than five well
those are all the numbers because five is a prime
that's why we get four five six well there's only
one and five the other numbers have common factors
so five six drops down to two five seven well
seven is a prime so every number is relatively
prime and that's six five8 you can check is four
five of9 is is the number in this set here are
the relatively prime things that's six 510 is
4 51 is 10 because that's a prime and 52 is four
and it goes on there's a kind of a pattern but the
pattern depends very much on how how far away this
number is from being Prime so you really want to
know the prime factorization of this number before
you can easily write down for bigger numbers the
uh the oiler F function for it okay so here is
Oiler generalization of fos theorem it tells us
what exponent we need to raise a number n to in
order to get a remainder of one modulo some other
number M and in this case M does not have to be
prime if m is prime then this formula reduces es
to fos theorem so it's a generalization of fos
theorem so the statement is that if n and M are
relatively prime and I remind you that means they
have no common factors like s and six or 6 and 11
but not like 10 and 8 they have a common factor
so if n and M are relatively prime then n to the
5 m is congruent to 1 mod M and the interesting
thing is that the exponent here works for each
of these numbers n which are relatively prime to
M the exponent only depends on M so if you know
M you can calculate 5 m then you know the magic
number that you need to raise any other relatively
prime number to in order to get that beautiful one
that makes so much of this modular arithmetic much
simpler so let me illustrate this at least
uh quickly by showing you these tables of
powers where our modulus is not a prime number
anymore so here's the case when the modulus is
six m is six and the 5 m happens to be two
so here are the numbers from 0 up to five
and here are the various Powers mod 6 so
there's two 2^ SAR is 4 2 cubed is 8 but
8 is the same as two then we multiply that
by two get 2 the 4th that's 4 2 the 5th is
2 notice that there's no one appearing here
there's no way of getting a remainder of one
when you take powers of two mod 6 in fact
fots theorem doesn't apply Oilers theorem
doesn't apply to this because two and six are
not relatively prime but say five and six are
relatively prime and if we look at powers of
five well it's not too hard a 5^ squar is 25
which is the same as one so it goes 51 51 51 Etc
but Oiler is saying that if we look at the just
the second power 5 m equal 2 then whenever we
have a relatively prime number namely one and
five then their Square will be congruent to one
mod six that's maybe even a little bit too small
to see what's going on so here's a little bit of
a bigger table where m is 8 we're working mod 8
here are the various numbers remainders mod 8
and here are various Powers mod 8 so there's 3
the 1 3 2 3 cubed 3 4 Etc all the way three to
seven and 5 m is four so Oiler tells us that we
should expect to see ones in these fourth Powers
fact we do see ones but we also see zeros we see
ones exactly here at the one the three the five
and the Seven these are the numbers which are
relatively prime to eight 1 3 5 and 7 note
perhaps curiously that say powers of two do
a somewhat curious thing so 2^2 is 4 and then
we multiply that by two we get eight but eight
is congruent to zero and then after the words
we still just get zeros for ever after after
that so FAS theorem Oilers theorem gives us
a lot of information about powers of numbers
uh in this modular arithmetic setting and they
are pillars of modern number Theory and they're
also very important in modern Internet Security
various encryption decryption algorithms that
rely essentially on them and those kind of
algorithms also take into consideration the
relative difficulty of being able to find F
of M when m is a very big number it turns out
that that's intimately connected with the
thorny problem of factoring M into primes
which was all of what famous math problems
number one was all about so this question
of given a big number m a natural number how do
you factor it into primes can you always factor
numbers into primes well um that is a subtle
question so we're going to have to say some uh
non-standard things about unique factorization
okay so that's what we're going to do in our
next video we're going to have a look at
unique factorization for numbers does it
really work I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening